# The Standard Library

- Like Python, Go follows a "batteries included" philosophy, offering a rich standard library that addresses modern programming needs.
- Read : [Go Documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/std)

## io and Friends

- The `io` package is central to Go's I/O operations, defining interfaces like `io.Reader` and `io.Writer`.
- `io.Reader` has the `Read` method, which modifies a provided byte slice and returns the number of bytes read.
- `io.Writer` has the `Write` method, which writes bytes to a destination. It returns number of bytes written and error if something went wrong.
- These interfaces are widely used for working with files, network connections, and streams.

````go
type Reader interface {
    Read(p []byte) (n int, err error)
}

type Writer interface {
    Write(p []byte) (n int, err error)
}
````

### Efficient Buffer Usage

````go
func countLetters(r io.Reader) (map[string]int, error) {
    buf := make([]byte, 2048)
    out := map[string]int{}
    for {
        n, err := r.Read(buf)
        for _, b := range buf[:n] {
            if (b >= 'A' && b <= 'Z') || (b >= 'a' && b <= 'z') {
                out[string(b)]++
            }
        }
        if err == io.EOF {
            return out, nil
        }
        if err != nil {
            return nil, err
        }
    }
}
````

- Using a reusable buffer in `Read` prevents excessive memory allocations and garbage collection overhead.

````go
// since io.Reader/io.Writer are very simple interfaces that they can be reimplemented in many ways.
s := "The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog"
sr := strings.NewReader(s)
counts, err := countLetters(sr)
if err != nil {
    return err
}
fmt.Println(counts)
````

- Functions like `io.Copy` facilitate easy data transfer between `io.Reader` and `io.Writer` implementations.
- Helper functions include:
  - `io.MultiReader` (reads sequentially from multiple readers)
  - `io.MultiWriter` (writes to multiple writers simultaneously)
  - `io.LimitReader` (restricts the number of bytes read from a reader)

### Working with Files

- The `os` package provides file handling functions like `os.Open`, `os.Create`, and `os.WriteFile`.
- The `bufio` package offers buffered I/O for efficient reading and writing.
- `gzip.NewReader` wraps an `io.Reader` to handle gzip-compressed files.

### Closing Resources Properly

- `io.Closer` interface defines the `Close` method for resource cleanup.
- `defer f.Close()` ensures files are closed after use, preventing resource leaks.
- Avoid deferring `Close` in loops to prevent excessive open file handles.

### Seeking in Streams

- `io.Seeker` provides `Seek(offset int64, whence int) (int64, error)` for random access in files.
- The `whence` parameter should ideally have been a custom type instead of `int` for clarity.

### Combining Interfaces

- Go defines composite interfaces like `io.ReadWriter`, `io.ReadCloser`, and `io.ReadWriteSeeker` to provide combined functionalities.
- These interfaces make functions more reusable and compatible with various implementations.

### Additional Utils

- `io.ReadAll` reads an entire `io.Reader` into a byte slice.
- `io.NopCloser` wraps an `io.Reader` to satisfy the `io.ReadCloser` interface, implementing a no-op `Close` method.
- The `os.ReadFile` and `os.WriteFile` functions handle full-file reads and writes but should be used cautiously with large files.

Go’s `io` package and related utilities exemplify simplicity and flexibility. By leveraging these standard interfaces and functions, developers can write modular, efficient, and idiomatic Go programs that interact seamlessly with different data sources and sinks.

## time

- `time` package provides two main types `time.Duration` and `time.Time`
- `time.Duration` represents a period of time based on `int64`. It can represent nanoseconds, microseconds, milliseconds, seconds, minutes and hour.

````go
d := 2 * time.Hour + 30 * time.Minute // d is of type time.Duration
````

- Go defines a sensible string format, a series of numbers that can be parsed using `time.Duration` with the `time.ParseDuration`. Like `300ms`, `-1.5h` or `2h45m`. [Go Standard Library Documentation](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration)
- `time.Time` type represents a moment in time complete with timezone.
- `time.Now` provides a reference to current time returning a `time.Time` instance.
- `time.Parse` function converts from a `string` to a `time.Time`, while the `Format` method converts a `time.Time` to a `string`. [Constants Format](https://pkg.go.dev/time#pkg-constants)

````go
t, err := time.Parse("2006-01-02 15:04:05 -0700", "2023-03-13 00:00:00 +0000")
if err != nil {
    return err
}
fmt.Println(t.Format("January 2, 2006 at 3:04:05PM MST"))

// March 13, 2023 at 12:00:00AM UTC
````

- `time.Time` instances can compared using `After`, `Before`, and `Equal` methods.
- `Sub`/`Add` method returns a `time.Duration` representing elapsed/summing time between two `time.Time` instances.

### Monotonic Time

- OS tracks two types of time tracking
  - the *wall clock* which corresponds to the current time.
  - *monotonic clock* which counts up from time the computer was booted.
- Reason is tracking two times is because *wall clock* is not consistent and changes based on Daylight Savings, Leap Seconds, NTP Updates.
- Go invisibly uses *monotonic* time to track elapsed time whenever a timer is set or `time.Time` instance is created.

### Timers and Timeout

- `time.After` returns a channel that outputs once.
- `time.Tick` returns a new value every time specified with `time.Duration`. NOTE: be careful to use this as underlying `time.Ticker` can not be shut down. Use the `time.NewTicker` instead.
- `time.AfterFunc` triggers a specific function post some `time.Duration`

## encoding/json

- REST APIs have made JSON as standard way to communicate between services.
- *Marshalling* : converting a Go data type to and encoding
- *Unmarshalling* : converting to a Go data type.

### Using Struct Tags to Add Metadata

- Struct tags define how Go struct fields map to JSON fields.
- Syntax: `json:"field_name”`
- If no struct tag is provided, JSON field name default to the Go struct field names.
- JSON field names are case-insensitive when unmarshalling.
- To ignore a field : `json:"-"`
- To omit empty values: `json:"field_name,omitempty"`
- `go vet` can validate struct tags but the compiler does not.

````json
{
    "id":"12345",
    "date_ordered":"2020-05-01T13:01:02Z",
    "customer_id":"3",
    "items":[{"id":"xyz123","name":"Thing 1"},{"id":"abc789","name":"Thing 2"}]
}
````

- To map above data we can create data type as

````go
type Order struct {
    ID            string        `json:"id"`
    DateOrdered   time.Time     `json:"date_ordered"`
    CustomerID    string        `json:"customer_id"`
    Items         []Item        `json:"items"`
}

type Item struct {
    ID   string `json:"id"`
    Name string `json:"name"`
}
````

### Unmarshaling and Marshaling

- Unmarshalling

````go
var o Order
err := json.Unmarshal([]byte(data), &o)
if err != nil {
    return err
}
````

- Marshalling

````go
out, err := json.Marshal(o)
````

- Uses **reflection** to read struct tags dynamically.

### JSON, Readers, and Writers

- `json.Marshal` and `json.Unmarshal` work with byte slices
- Efficient handling via `json.Decoder` (for reading) and `json.Encoder` (for writing), which work with `io.Reader` and `io.Writer`

- Example of encoding JSON to a file

````go
err = json.NewEncoder(tmpFile).Encode(toFile)
````

- Example decoding JSON from a file

````go
err = json.NewDecoder(tmpFile2).Decode(&fromFile)
````

### Encoding and Decoding JSON Streams

- Used for handling multiple JSON objects in a stream
- Decoding JSON streams

````go
var t struct {
    Name string `json:"name"`
    Age  int    `json:"age"`
}
dec := json.NewDecoder(strings.NewReader(streamData))
for {
    err := dec.Decode(&t)
    if err != nil {
        if errors.Is(err, io.EOF) {
            break
        }
        panic(err)
    }
}
````

- Encoding multiple JSON objects

````go 
var b bytes.Buffer
enc := json.NewEncoder(&b)
for _, input := range allInputs {
    t := process(input)
    err = enc.Encode(t)
    if err != nil {
        panic(err)
    }
}
````

### Custom JSON Parsing

- Needed when JSON format doesn’t align with Go’s built-in types.
- Example Custom time format handling

````go 
type RFC822ZTime struct {
    time.Time
}

func (rt RFC822ZTime) MarshalJSON() ([]byte, error) {
    out := rt.Time.Format(time.RFC822Z)
    return []byte(`"` + out + `"`), nil
}

func (rt *RFC822ZTime) UnmarshalJSON(b []byte) error {
    if string(b) == "null" {
        return nil
    }
    t, err := time.Parse(`"`+time.RFC822Z+`"`, string(b))
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
    *rt = RFC822ZTime{t}
    return nil
}
````

- Example Struct embedding to override marshalling behaviour

````go 
type Order struct {
    ID          string    `json:"id"`
    Items       []Item    `json:"items"`
    DateOrdered time.Time `json:"date_ordered"`
    CustomerID  string    `json:"customer_id"`
}

func (o Order) MarshalJSON() ([]byte, error) {
    type Dup Order
    tmp := struct {
        DateOrdered string `json:"date_ordered"`
        Dup
    }{
        Dup: (Dup)(o),
    }
    tmp.DateOrdered = o.DateOrdered.Format(time.RFC822Z)
    return json.Marshal(tmp)
}
````

## net/http

### The Client

- `http.Client` handles HTTP requests and responses.
- Avoid using `http.DefaultClient` in production (no timeout).
- Create a custom `http.Client`

````go
client := &http.Client{
  Timeout: 30 * time.Second
}
````

- Use `http.NewRequestWithContext` to create a request.
- Set request headers using `req.Header.Add()`.
- Use `client.Do(req)` to send the request.
- Read response data with `json.NewDecoder(res.Body).Decode(&data)`

````go
// getting a req instance
req, err := http.NewRequestWithContext(context.Background(),
    http.MethodGet, "https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1", nil)
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}

// adding headers
req.Header.Add("X-My-Client", "Learning Go")
res, err := client.Do(req)
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}

// decoding response
defer res.Body.Close()
if res.StatusCode != http.StatusOK {
    panic(fmt.Sprintf("unexpected status: got %v", res.Status))
}
fmt.Println(res.Header.Get("Content-Type"))
var data struct {
    UserID    int    `json:"userId"`
    ID        int    `json:"id"`
    Title     string `json:"title"`
    Completed bool   `json:"completed"`
}
err = json.NewDecoder(res.Body).Decode(&data)
if err != nil {
    panic(err)
}
fmt.Printf("%+v\n", data)
````

### The Server

- `http.Server` handles HTTP requests.
- Implements `http.Handler` interface:

````go
type Handler interface {
    ServeHTTP(http.ResponseWriter, *http.Request)
}
````

````go
s := http.Server{
    Addr:         ":8080",	// default 80
    ReadTimeout:  30 * time.Second,
    WriteTimeout: 90 * time.Second,
    Handler:      HelloHandler{},	// mux can be used
}
err := s.ListenAndServe()
if err != nil {
    if err != http.ErrServerClosed {
        panic(err)
    }
}
````

- `http.ResponseWriter` methods includes (in order):
  - `Header()` `http.Header`
  - `Write([]byte)` `(int, error)`
  - `WriteHeader(statusCode int)`

#### Request Routing 

- `*http.ServeMux` is used for routing requests
- `http.NewServeMux` fuction creates a new instance of `ServeMux` which meets the `http.Handler` interface, so can be assigned to `Handler` field in `http.Server`.

````go                                                                                   
mux.HandleFunc("/hello", func(w http.ResponseWrite, r *http.Request)) {
  w.Write([] byte("Hello!\n"));
}
````

- Go 1.22 extends the path syntax to optionally allow HTTP verbs and path wildcard variables.

````go                        
mux.HandleFunc("GET /hello/{name}", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    name := r.PathValue("name")
    w.Write([]byte(fmt.Sprintf("Hello, %s!\n", name)))
})
````

- `*http.ServeMux` dispatches request to `http.Handler` instances and implements them. We can create `*http.ServeMux` instance with multiple related request and register it with a parent `*http.ServeMux`

````go
person := http.NewServeMux()
person.HandleFunc("/greet", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    w.Write([]byte("greetings!\n"))
})
dog := http.NewServeMux()
dog.HandleFunc("/greet", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
    w.Write([]byte("good puppy!\n"))
})
mux := http.NewServeMux()
mux.Handle("/person/", http.StripPrefix("/person", person))
mux.Handle("/dog/", http.StripPrefix("/dog", dog))
````

- `/person/greet` is handled by handler attached to `person`, while `/dog/greet` is handled by handlers attached to `dog`

### Middleware

- Middleware takes `http.Handler` instance and returns `http.Handler` (usually a closure)
- Its usually used to plugin some transformation or validation in requests.

````go
// example-request timer middleware
func RequestTimer(h http.Handler) http.Handler {
    return http.HandlerFunc(func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        start := time.Now()
        h.ServeHTTP(w, r)
        dur := time.Since(start)
        slog.Info("request time",
            "path", r.URL.Path,
            "duration", dur)
    })
}

// using it
mux.Handle("/hello", RequestTimer(
    http.HandlerFunc(func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        w.Write([]byte("Hello!\n"))
    })))
````

- Since `*http.ServeMux` implements the `http.Handler` interface, a set of middlewares can be applied to all registered handlers.

````go
terribleSecurity := TerribleSecurityProvider("GOPHER")
wrappedMux := terribleSecurity(RequestTimer(mux))
s := http.Server{
    Addr:    ":8080",
    Handler: wrappedMux,
}
````

- Third Party modules to enhance server
  - `alice` allows function chains for middlewares
  - `gorilla mux` and `chi` both are very good request routers
  - `Echo` and `Gin` web frameworks implements their own handler and middleware patterns

### Response Controller

- Backward Compatibility Challenge:

  - Modifying interfaces breaks backward compatibility in Go
  - New methods cannot be added to existing interfaces without breaking existing implementations

- Tradition Approach - Using Additional Interfaces

  - Example: `http.ResponseWriter` could not be modified directly
  - Instead, optional functionality added through new interfaces like `http.Flusher` and `http.Hijacker`
  - This approach makes hard to discover new interfaces and requires verbose type assertions

- New Approach - Concrete Wrapper Type

  - In Go 1.20, to extend `http.ResponseWriter` without breaking compatibility 
  - `http.NewResponseController(rw)` returns a `http.ResponseController` that wraps `http.ResponseWriter`
  - New optional methods are exposed via this wrapper, avoiding interface modification.

- Checking for Optional Methods using Error Handling

  - Instead of type assertions, optional functionality is checked using error comparison:

  - ````go
    err = rc.Flush()
    if err != nil && !errors.Is(err, http.ErrNotSupported) { /* handle error */ }
    ````

  - If `Flush` is unsupported, program handles it gracefully.

- Advantages of `http.ResponseController`
  - New methods can be added **without breaking existing implementations**.
  - Makes **new functionality discoverable** and easy to use.
  - Provides a **standardized way** to check for optional methods using error handling
- Future Use
  - More optional methods (like SetReadDeadline, SetWriteDeadline) are added via http.ResponseController.
  - This pattern will likely be used for future extensions of http.ResponseWriter.

## Structured Logging

- The Go standard library initially included the log package for simple logging, which lacked support for structured logs.
- Structured logs use a consistent format for each entry, facilitating automated processing and analysis.

#### Challenges with Unstructured Logging

- Modern web services handle millions of users simultaneously, necessitating automated log analysis.
- Unstructured logs complicate pattern recognition and anomaly detection due to inconsistent formatting.

#### Introduction of `log`/`slog` Package

- Go 1.21 introduced the log/slog package to address structured logging needs.
- This addition promotes consistency and interoperability among Go modules.

#### Advantages of Standardized Structured Logging

- Prior to log/slog, various third-party loggers like zap, logrus, and go-kit log offered structured logging, leading to fragmentation.
- A unified standard library logger simplifies integration and control over log outputs and levels.

- Structured logging was introduced as a separate package (log/slog) rather than modifying the existing log package to maintain clear and distinct APIs.
- The API is scalable, starting with simple default loggers and allowing for advanced configurations.

#### Basic Usage of log/slog

- Provides functions like `slog.Debug`, `slog.Info`, `slog.Warn`, and `slog.Error` for logging at various levels.
- Default logger output includes timestamp, log level, and message.
- Supports adding custom key-value pairs to log entries for enhanced context.

````go
userID := "fred"
loginCount := 20
slog.Info("user login", "id", userID, "login_count", loginCount)

// output
2023/04/20 23:36:38 INFO user login id=fred login_count=20
````

#### **Customizing Log Output Formats**:

- Allows switching from text to JSON format for logs.

````go
options := &slog.HandlerOptions{Level: slog.LevelDebug}
handler := slog.NewJSONHandler(os.Stderr, options)
mySlog := slog.New(handler)
lastLogin := time.Date(2023, 01, 01, 11, 50, 00, 00, time.UTC)
mySlog.Debug("debug message", "id", userID, "last_login", lastLogin)

// ouput
{"time":"2023-04-22T23:30:01.170243-04:00","level":"DEBUG","msg":"debug message","id":"fred","last_login":"2023-01-01T11:50:00Z"}
````

#### Performance Consideration

- To optimize performance and reduce allocations, use LogAttrs with predefined attribute types.

````go
mySlog.LogAttrs(ctx, slog.LevelInfo, "faster logging",
            slog.String("id", userID),
            slog.Time("last_login", lastLogin))
````

#### Interoperability with Existing log Package:

- The log package remains supported; log/slog offers enhanced features without deprecating existing functionality.
- Bridging between log and slog is possible using slog.NewLogLogger.

````go
myLog := slog.NewLogLogger(mySlog.Handler(), slog.LevelDebug)
myLog.Println("using the mySlog Handler")

// 
{"time":"2023-04-22T23:30:01.170269-04:00","level":"DEBUG","msg":"using the mySlog Handler"}
````

**Additional Features of log/slog**:

- Supports dynamic logging levels and context integration.
- Offers value grouping and common header creation for logs.
- Detailed API documentation provides further insights into advanced functionalities.