## An Array of Sequences

There are two types of Sequences

- Container Sequences : `list`, `tuple`, and `collections.deque` : holds references to object it contains (of any type)
- Flat Sequences : `str`, `bytes`, and `array.array` : stores the value of its contents in its own memory space (space efficient but can only hold primitive types)

Another way of grouping sequence is by mutability

- Mutable Sequence (changed) : `list`, `bytearray`, `array.array` and `collections.deque`
- Immutable Sequence : `tuple`, `str` and `bytes`

NOTE:  mutable sequences inherit all methods from immutable sequences and implement several additional methods.

### List Comprehension

Example : build a list of unicode characters

````python
symbols = 'abcde'
codes = [ord(symbol) for symbol in symbols]
print(codes)

# using a loop
# codes = []
# for symbol in symbols:
#		codes.append(ord(symbol))
````

NOTE : use list comprehension when you are building a list but doing a lot of more than that always use for loops as they are more readible.

**Local Scope in List Comprehension**

If we use `:=` (walrus operator) while assigning value then its accesible even after list comprehension or generator expression.

````python
x = 'ABC'
codes = [last := ord(c) for c in x]
print(codes) 	# [65, 66, 67]
print(last)		# 67
````

*NOTE: listcomps are as fast as map/filter/reduce operation sometimes outperforming them*.

#### Catersian Products

````python
colors = ['black', 'white']
size = ['S', 'M', 'L']

tshirts = [(color, size) for color in colors for size in sizes]
# it does cartesion product of colors x size
# ouptut : [('black', 'S'), ('black', 'M'), ('black', 'L'), ('white', 'S'),
# ('white', 'M'), ('white', 'L')]
````

### Generator Expressions (genexp)

you could always use listcomp, but genexp saves memory because it yields items one by one using the iterator protocol instead of building a whole list just to feed to another constructor.

````python
symbols = 'lion'
tuple(ord(symbol) for symbol in symbols)	# notice now its not [] instead ()
import array
array.array('I', ord(symbol) for symbol in symbols)

# in previous catesian product lets say if we had 1000 records then its would be very memory heavy to generate all those lists
for tshirts in (f'{c}{s}' for c in colors for s in sizes):
	print(tshirt)
````

### Tuples

Tuples are not just `immutable list` they can be used for two purpose, immutable list and records with no field names.

````python
lax_coordinates = (33.9425, -118.408056)
# tuple unpacking
city, year, pop, chg, area = ('Tokyo', 2003, 32_450, 0.66, 8014)

# slots based tuple unpacking
traveler_ids = [('USA', '31195855'), ('BRA', 'CE342567')]
for passport in sorted(traveler_ids):
  print('%s/%s' % passport)
  
# nested unpacking 
name, _, _, (lat, lon) = ('Tokyo', 'JP', 36.933, (35.689722, 139.691667))
````

#### Tuple as Immutable Lists

Python interpretor and standard library makes extensive use of tuple as immutable list. It has 2 benefits

- Clarity (length never changes)
- Performance (uses less memory than a list of same length)

NOTE: `tuple` immutability applies only to references contained in it but if references are mutable objects then they can be modified but not their reference.

Ex : `a = (10, 'alpha', [1,2])` , this is a bad practice as list can be modified in this tuple effectively changing tuple.

*An object is only hashable if its value cannot ever change, as a result we can’t use unhashable tuple as a dict key or a set element.*

````python
# handy function to quickly check if an object is hashable
def fixed(obj):
  try:
    hash(obj)
  except TypeError:
    return False
  return True
````

[Are Tuples more efficient than list in Python](https://fpy.li/2-3)

```python
a, b = b, a # unpacking based swapping trick
# another use is argument unpacking
t = (20, 8)
# q, r = divmod(20,8)
q, r = divmod(*t)
```

#### Using `*` to Grab Excess Items

`````python
a, b, *rest = range(5)	# (1, 2, [3,4,5])
a, *mid, c = range(5)		# (1, [2, 3, 4], 5)
*s , b, c = range(5)		# ([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
`````

#### Unpacking with `*` in Function Calls and Sequence Literals

````python
def fun(a, b, c, d, *rest):
  	return a, b, c, d, rest
  
fun(*[1,2], 3, *range(4,7)) # (1, 2, 3, 4, (5, 6))

tupl = *range(4), 4		# (1,2,3,4)
lst = [*range(4), 4]	# [1,2,3,4]
st = {*range(4), 4, *(5,6,7)} # {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}
````

### Pattern Matching with Sequences

Matching commands like `BEEPER 440 3`

````python
def handle_command(self, message):
  match message:
    case ['BEEPER', frequency, times]:
      self.beep(times, frequency)
    case ['NECK', angle]:
      self.rotate_neck(angle)
    case ['LED', ident, intensity]:
      self.leds[ident].set_color(ident, red, green, blue)
    case _:
      raise InvalidCommand(message)
````

It looks like simple C match-case but its supports `destructuring` (commonly used in Scala and Elixir).

````python
# note how [] can be multiline
metro_areas = [
    ('Tokyo', 'JP', 36.933, (35.689722, 139.691667)),
    ('Delhi NCR', 'IN', 21.935, (28.613889, 77.208889)),
]
def func():
  for record in metro_ares:
    match record:
      case [name, _, _, (lat, lon)] if lon <= 0:
        print(f"{name:15} | {lat:9.4f} | {lon:9.4f}")
````

Here sequence pattern matches only if

- subject is a sequence
- subject and pattern have same number of items (could be avoided by variable unpacking but should not use it due to unexpected bugs)
- each corresponding items matches, including nested ones

In standard library these types are compatible with sequence patterns : `list, memoryview, array.array, tuple, range, collection.deque`. Unlike unpacking patterns don’t destructure iterables that are not sequences like iterators.

We could also use `as` keyword in case : `case [name, _, _, (lat, lon) as coord]`.

We could make patterns more specific using types : `case [str(name), _, _, (float(lat), float(lon))]` or this also works `case[str(name), *_, (float(lat), float(lon))]` (ignore all variables in between)

**Interesting Example :** [Link](https://github.com/fluentpython/lispy/blob/main/original/norvig/lis.py) Peter Norvig wrote `lis.py` : an interpretor for a subset of Scheme dialect of List Programming language in 132 lines of code. Notice how he move his code commits from elif to match-case as python 3.10 progresses

#### Alternative patterns for lambda

Syntax of lambda in Scheme : `(lambda(params ...) body1 body2)`, this could be written as `case ['lambda', [*params], *body] if body`

#### Shortcut syntax for function definition

syntax : `define (name param ...) body1 body2 ...)`

````python
case ['define', [Symbol() as name, *params], *body] if body:
  env[name] = Procedure(param, body, env)
````

### Slicing

A common feature of `list`, `tuple`, `str` and all sequence types in Python is support of slicing operation.

NOTE: slices and ranges exclude the last element (following 0 indexing of C)

```python
# slice = arr[start:stop:step]
```

NOTE: length of slice = stop-start, slicing an array into two equal part at x is `arr[:x]` and `arr[x:]`

NOTE: notation `a:b:c` is only valid within `[]`, it produces a slice object: `slice(a, b, c)` which is evaluated usinng `seq.__getitem__(slice(a,b,c))`.

#### Multidimensional Slicing and Ellipsis

`[]` operator can take multiple indexes or slices separated by commas. Python calls `a.__getitem__((i,j))` to evaluate `a[i,j]`. Notice how (i,j) is a tuple. Its used NumPy packages a lot, where we can fetch items of 2D `numpy.ndarray` like this : `a[m:n, k:l]`

Except for `memoryview`, the built-in sequence types in python are one-dimensional.

The ellipsis (`...`) is recognized as a token by the Python parser. It is an alias to `Ellipsis` object. It can be passed as an argument to functions and as part of a slice specification, as in `f(a, ..., z)` or `a[i:...]`.Numpy uses `...` as a shortcut for multidimensional slicing. for e.g. 4 dimensional array, `x[i, ...]` is evaluated as `x[i, :, :, :]`

#### Assigning to slicing

Mutable objects can be grafted, excised or modified in place using slicing

````python
l = list(range(10))
l[2:5] = [20,30] # modifying
del l[5:7]	# removing items
````

#### Using + and * with Sequences

`+` concatenates the two same type of sequences while `*` concatenates the same sequence to itself. (as many times scalar is specified: `[1]*4] = [1, 1, 1, 1]`)

NOTE: take note of `a*n` expressions as if you do `mylist = [[] * 3]` it will create a list with three references to same list, causing weird behaviour.

### Augmented Assignment with Sequences

`+=` and `*=` behave quite differently depending on first operand. `+=` internally calls `__iadd__` (in-place addition). In case of mutable sequences (`list`, `bytearray`, `array.array`) `a` will be changed in-place more like `a.extend(b)`. However if `__iadd__` is not implemented then expression will have same effect as `a = a + b` , evalute addition and assign to `a`.

````python
l = [1,2,3]
id(l)	# prints object id
l *= 2
id(l) # should be same as before

# tuple
t = (1,2,3)
id(t)
t *= 2
id(t)	# should be differnt id (object is augmented)
````

### list.sort v/s sorted Built-in

`list.sort` method sorts list in-place, without making copy. It return `None` to remind that it changes the receiver and doesn’t create a new list. (IMPORTANT API Convention in python).

`sorted` creates a new list and return it. It accepts any iterable object as argument, including immutable sequences and generators. Regardless of type sorted always returns sorted **list**!

Both function accept two optional, keyword only arguments:

`reverse` : If true items are in descending order

`key`: A one-argument function that applied to each item to produce its sorting key. default is the item itself but commonly used ones are `key=str.lower` or `key=len`.

Once sorted you can efficiently search using binary search using `bisect` module of python. you can use `bisect.insort` to keep your sorted sequences sorted. [link](https://www.fluentpython.com/extra/ordered-sequences-with-bisect/)

### When a List is not the Answer

`list` is flexible and easy to use, but depending on specific requirements there are better options like `array` which save lots of memory when you need to handle millions of floating-point values. If you are constantly removing items from opposite ends of a list use `collections.deque`

#### Array

`array.array` is more efficient for storing same type of data. it supports all mutable sepquence operations as well as additional methods for fast loading and saving like `.frombytes` and `.tofile`

````python
from array import array
from random import random
floats = array('d', (random() for i in range(10**7)))
print(floats[-1])
# should use context-manager for this
fp = open('floats.bin', 'wb')
floats.tofile(fp)
fp.close()

# with open('floats.bin', 'wb') as fp:
#   floats.tofile(fp)
floats2 = array('d')
fp = open('floats.bin', 'rb')
floats2.fromfile(fp, 10**7)
fp.close()
floats2[-1]
````

NOTE: `array` doesn’t support in-place sort method like `list.sort()`, we will need to use built-in `sorted` function to rebuild array

`a = array.array(a.typecode, sorted(a))`

#### Memory Views

The built-in `memoryview` class is a shared memory sequence type that lets you handles slices of arrays without copying bytes.

*A memoryview is essentially a generalized NumPy array structure in Python itself (without the math). It allows you to share memory between data-structures (things like PIL images, SQLite databases, NumPy arrays, etc.) without first copying. This is very important for large data sets.*

````python
from array import array
octets array('B', range(6))
m1 = memoryview(octets)
m1.tolist()	# [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
m2 = m1.cast('B', [2,3])
m2.tolist() # [[0, 1, 2], [3, 4, 5]]
m3 = m1.case('B', [3,2])
m3.tolist() # [[0,1],[2,3],[4,5]]
````

You can use it to create batches from array.

#### Brief introduction to Numpy

For advanced array and matrix operation, Numpy is used. Numpy implements multi-dimensional, homogenous arrays and matrix types that hold not only numbers but also use-defined records and provides efficient element-wise operations.

````python
import numpy as np
a = np.arange(12)
type(a)
print(a.shape)
a.shape = 3, 4
print(a) # 	[[0,1,2,3],[4,5,6,7],[8,9,10,11]]
print(a[:, 1]) # [1, 5, 9]
a.transpose() # [[0,4,8], [1,5,9], [2,6,10], [3,7,11]]
# trick used in ml to get features and labels
X = a[:,:-1]
y = a[:, -1]
````

#### Deques and Other Queues

`.append` and `.pop` methods make a `list` usable as a stack or a queue. But inserting and removing from head of a list is costly because the entire list is shifted in memory.

`collections.deque` is a thread-safe double ended queue designed for fast inserting and removing from both ends. Its is also the way to keep list of last seen items or something because it can be bounded(fixed size).

when you try to insert in a full bounded deque, it discards item from opposite end and inserts the item

Besides deque there are some other Python standard library implementations of queues

````python
from collection import deque
dq = deque(range(10), maxlen = 10)
print(dq)
dq.rotate(3)
print(dq)
dq.rotate(-4)
print(dq) # deque is restored
dq.appendleft(-1)
dq.extend([11,12,13]) # notice how lenght is fixed
dq.extendleft([10,20,30]) # notice how items on other end are discarded
````



- `queue` : This provides the synchronized(thread-safe) classes `SimpleQueue`, `Queue`, `LifoQueue` and `PriorityQueue`. These can be used for safe communication between threads. All except `SimpleQueue` can be bounded by providing a `maxsize` argument greater than 0 to the constructor. However they don’t discard items to make room as `deque` does. Instead it blocks the inserts of a new item until some thread makes room in the queue for items by taking from queue. It is usefull for implement n-worker threads models etc.
- `multiprocessing` : Implements its own `SimpleQueue` and bounded `Queue` but designed for interprocess communication. A specialized `multiprocessing.JoinableQueue` is provided for task management.
- `asyncio` : Provides `Queue`, `LifoQueue`, `PriorityQueue` and `JoinableQueue` with APIs inspired by the class in `queue` and `multiprocessing` modules but adapted for asynchronous programming.
- `headpq` : doesn’t implement queue class instead provide functions like `heappush` and `heappop` that lets you use mutable sequence as heap queue or priority queue.